{"video_id": "_RlRDWO2jfg", "title": "Build Bigger Shoulders With Perfect Training Technique (The Overhead Press)", "author": "Jeff Nippard", "difficulty": "intermediate", "exercise_type": "overhead_press", "full_url": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_RlRDWO2jfg", "clean_transcript": "Okay, welcome everyone to a new episode of Technique Tuesday. This week, we're going to be looking at how to perform the overhead barbell press, or OHP, with perfect technique. With this movement, we're performing shoulder flexion, basically lifting your arm up overhead, which will be handled by the anterior or front deltoid and, to a lesser degree, the clavicular or upper head of the pecs. We'll also be performing elbow extension, which will hit all three heads of the triceps, and when viewed from the back, you can see that there will be scapular upward rotation occurring, handled by the upper traps. I like the overhead press for two main reasons. First, being a basic multi-joint barbell movement, it allows for a good deal of progressive overload, although it usually does take longer to gain strength on than other exercises, so be patient. Second, it is a great general strength-building exercise that goes through a huge range of motion, nearly 180 degrees of shoulder flexion. However, there is one thing that I don't love about the overhead press, and that is that it is quite front deltoid dominant. One 2013 study comparing four shoulder press variations found that dumbbell presses were better than barbell presses for targeting the side delts, and in both cases, doing your presses standing rather than sitting was better for the side delts. So, if growing the side delt is the main goal, in addition to a lateral raise, you may want to include a dumbbell press. However, the range of motion may be cut shorter here, especially as you go heavier, as the bulky head of the dumbbell might start hitting your shoulders on the way down, ending the range of motion. In practice, I think it's smart to combine and periodically vary exercises, and while it isn't perfect on its own, I do still like the overhead press as a core, sort of bread-and-butter, vertical pressing movement. Because the OHP involves multiple joints and uses a large range of motion, generally speaking, it should be loaded with moderate to heavy weight, somewhere in the 5 to 10 rep zone. You want to set up the bar in a squat rack at the same height you would for a squat, somewhere around armpit height. You want to unrack the weight by gripping the bar with a slightly wider than shoulder-width grip, so your hands are just outside your shoulders. Get your elbows underneath the bar while slightly bending the knees and hips and stand up straight, lifting the bar up off the rack. Take two to three steps back and firmly plant your feet with a roughly shoulder-width stance and a slight 15-degree foot flare. You want to point your elbows slightly outside your shoulders, and this will be your starting position. Although I wouldn't normally recommend a thumbless, so-called suicide grip for anyone new to the movement, as you get more comfortable with it, I think the thumbless grip can be used here as long as your wrists are stacked, meaning from the side position the bar should be resting above the wrist joint, not behind the wrist joint near the fingers. You want to externally rotate your shoulders, pushing the elbows slightly out at about a 45-degree angle. You don't want them flared too much out to the sides, which can cause shoulder pain, and you don't want them straight in front of the shoulders, which will limit your strength potential. With the bar resting on your upper chest or collarbone area, you want to flex your glutes to ensure that your spine is kept neutral and take a deep breath into your gut, pressing the air out against your belt if you have one, which is going to increase intra-abdominal pressure and torso rigidity. As you press, while holding your breath, press the bar straight up, not up and forward or up and backward. When viewed from the side, the bar should be traveling up in a pretty much straight line. In order to keep the bar from hitting your chin, you'll have to slightly tilt your head back as you initiate the press, then as you clear your face, push your head forward back to a neutral position. Throughout the concentric, you want to keep your knees, hips, and shoulder blades motionless. The common error here is to shrug your shoulders up to initiate the concentric off the chest, and while this may make the movement easier in the short term, I think in the long term it really can weaken your bottom-end concentric pressing ability and end up limiting your true max strength potential. Press the bar all the way up until your elbows lock out with the bar overhead centered over the shoulder joint. At the end of the range of motion, there should be a pretty much straight line connecting the barbell, the shoulders, the hips, and the middle of the foot. This will keep everything in balance and prevent you from shifting your weight excessively forward onto your toes or backward onto your heels. Everything should be balanced directly over the middle of the foot. Start the eccentric by dropping your elbows down and to the side at a 45-degree angle, so not straight down in front of your delts. Allow the bar to come to a full and complete stop here while you take in another full breath of air and begin another rep. Of course, I think both the seated and the standing dumbbell shoulder press make for reasonable alternatives or additions here, since including isolateral movements can help prevent muscle imbalances and asymmetries. The seated variation will allow for the use of heavier loads; however, the standing variation will increase stabilization demands, meaning more core and side delt activation. Unlike with the barbell press, here you can just press the dumbbells straight up, with the dumbbells more out to the sides, since you don't need to worry about smashing your face on the way up. For the dumbbell variations, I prefer slightly higher reps, usually in the 8 to 15 rep zone. I would say the most common error that I see here is just not using a full range of motion. Similar to the pull-up, many people will cut the range of motion short at the top and the bottom, not going to full lockout and also not touching the chest at the bottom. Keeping your range of motion consistent will ensure you're actually gaining strength through progressive overload, not progressive decreases in range of motion. Although not inherently problematic or injurious, I am going to consider doing touch-and-go reps as another error here, since they're going to create more inconsistent reps and often lead to bouncy reps with lots of momentum and reliance on that stretch reflex at the bottom. If any of this gets too excessive, I think it really can hinder your true brute pressing strength required to get that bar moving from a dead stop. A third error that I see here all the time is not flexing the glutes. The goal of this exercise is to press the bar as vertically as you comfortably can, and keeping your glutes relaxed will usually result in the hips being back behind the bar, which reduces stability and more often than not results in the bar being pressed forward rather than straight up. This is a bad habit and can put a lot of strain on your lower back and create more inconsistency in both your bar path and form in general. Okay, so that's all that I have for the overhead press, guys. Before you click out of this one, I've got a quick rundown of what I have planned for the next few Technique Tuesday episodes. You guys may have noticed that I've been skipping leg day so far in the series. For the next three episodes, we're going to hit three different lower body exercises, starting with the squat next week. I should say here that there is no underlying method or meaning to the order in which I'm covering these exercises. I'm obviously trying to focus on exercises that I think are smart to include in your program, but I'm trying to space out the more time-consuming and longer videos, like the squat, bench press, and deadlift, so I don't burn out too quickly on production from the beginning. Anyway, all those videos are coming, and I have the whole series mapped out until about mid-June as of now. For the release of the first shoulder-related video here, I'm going to be offering my men and women's shoulder hypertrophy training program or training manual at 50% off. For this week, you can get it for $9.99. You can find these at the discounted rate for the next week on my website, JeffNippert.com, or by clicking the first link in the description. Guys, don't forget to leave me a like on the video if you enjoyed it, don't forget to subscribe so that you don't miss future Technique Tuesday episodes, and I'll see you guys all here next Tuesday for the squat."}