{"video_id": "vcBig73ojpE", "title": "How To Get A Huge Bench Press with Perfect Technique", "author": "Jeff Nippard", "difficulty": "intermediate", "exercise_type": "bench_press", "full_url": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vcBig73ojpE", "clean_transcript": "Welcome, everyone, to the first episode of Technique Tuesday, where every week we're going to take an in-depth look at the lost art and science of training technique. Just as a quick general outline, for the most part, we will break each exercise into four sections. We will look at the muscles we'll be targeting, how to set up for the exercise, the execution of the movement, and common errors that I see many people make. So without further ado, let's jump right into it with the bench press exercise. \n\nThe muscles we'll be targeting here, in order of involvement, are the pec major, both the sternal (mid and lower) and clavicular (upper) heads, the triceps brachii, the anterior (front) deltoid, and, to a lesser extent, the lats. They'll only be active when the shoulder is behind the torso, at the very bottom of the press. The primary actions being trained are horizontal shoulder adduction, carried out mainly by the pecs and anterior deltoids, some degree of shoulder flexion by the upper pecs and front delt, and elbow extension, primarily handled by the triceps.\n\nBefore we get into the full setup, it's important to emphasize that you should only compare your bench strength to your starting place and not to anyone else's. Many extraneous factors can contribute to performance on this lift, like arm length, rib cage size, muscle origins and insertions, lumbar spine mobility, and the size and strength of your upper back for creating a stable base of support.\n\nThe setup for the bench press is extremely important, and you may want to play this back a couple of times. I'll go through a strength-focused powerlifting-style bench press, which is a great mass builder for anyone aiming to build size. However, I'll explain slight modifications you can make if you have purely bodybuilding interests.\n\nHere we go. First, double-check that you have the right weight on both sides, that the bar is centered in the rack, and that you have a spotter handy if you're training at high efforts. Lie flat on the bench with your head back behind the bar. With your feet up on the bench, squeeze your shoulder blades together, keeping them in this retracted position throughout the setup and execution of the lift. Setup your arch by lifting your arms up and grabbing the bar with a shoulder-width grip, or you can reach back and push against the bench's uprights. I prefer just grabbing the bar. Lift your hips high, pulling your shoulder blades to your butt. This helps force you into scapular depression and pushes your upper body forward, keeping your feet in place. You can go up onto your toes if you find you can get more arch that way.\n\nNow, your back should be planted on the bench, with your eyes directly under the barbell. Position your lower body for leg drive by lowering one foot at a time, positioning your feet as far back as you comfortably can, and keeping your legs close to the bench when viewed from the front. If using regulation technique, your heels should be planted on the ground, so you may need to externally rotate your feet or point your toes out. Make sure your hips are down so your butt touches the bench. Take your grip at this point. I widen my grip, which is on the wider side, as I'm stronger with a wider grip. \n\nResearch has found that wider grips will target the sternal head of the pecs and anterior delts more, while a closer grip will target the triceps and clavicular (upper) chest more. Using a variety of grip widths and experimenting to find what works best for you makes sense. However, an important factor in determining grip width is whether your joints are stacked from the rear position, meaning the wrist should be roughly positioned over the elbows. It's worth noting advanced powerlifters may not always keep the joints perfectly stacked. A 2007 study suggests a max width of 1.5 times the acromial distance (roughly 1.5 times shoulder-width) can reduce injury risk without seriously compromising maximal strength.\n\nAnother important point regarding grip is ensuring your wrist joints are stacked. From the side view, your wrist should be directly below your knuckles, avoiding excessive hyperextension. You can correct this by thinking about punching the ceiling as a cue. Before the lift-off, do one last check to make sure your shoulder blades are retracted and depressed by cranking your elbows forward, which I think of as screwing my back into position.\n\nFor those interested in bodybuilding only, the general setup can still apply. You won't need as extreme of an arch, and may want to take a slightly more narrow grip to increase the range of motion. Because your arch will be smaller, your feet can be a bit further forward, but still, for shoulder health and stability, keep your shoulder blades retracted and maintain some arch in your lumbar spine. People tend to exaggerate the difference in range of motion between a big arch and a small arch. It's worth noting that the distance traveled by the bar isn't necessarily the same as joint range of motion. For example, compare the joint angles in these two bench press styles. The position of the humerus relative to the torso at the end of the range of motion is similar despite the bar traveling further in the flat back press. You should work on building your arch and not worry too much about limiting your range of motion when using it.\n\nWe've got the bench press setup down; now it's time to execute the set. We'll break the execution into four phases: unrack, brace, descend, and press. First, unrack the bar with your spotter's help, lifting out, not up, or, if unracking by yourself, keep your butt elevated for the liftoff component, then drop your hips once you've unracked. I prefer having a spotter near a maximal effort to help with the liftoff. Ensure you have four main points of contact: your head, upper back, glutes, and feet should all be planted. In position, take a deep breath into your gut, pressing the air out against your belt if you have one. You can cue yourself to puff your chest out to expand the rib cage as much as possible. Grip the bar as hard as you can. You can optionally use the cue to bend the bar or rip it in half, activating your upper back muscles to maintain tightness. During the descent, drop your elbows at a 45-degree angle relative to your torso when viewed from the top. There's unanimous agreement on this from the best powerlifting coaches. When viewed from the side, the elbows shouldn't be too far in front of the bar. Aim to keep the elbow stacked under the bar. The descending bar path should be down and slightly forward. Touch your chest just below nipple level, toward the bottom of your sternum, which should be the highest contact point on your chest. You can optionally pause on your chest for about a second until the bar becomes motionless, which is required for competitive powerlifting. For bodybuilding, simply tap your chest without a pause. Ensure the touch is well controlled and not bouncing the weight off your chest.\n\nAfter your optional pause, explode the bar off your chest, driving your heels into the floor. Think about pressing the bar back toward your face and off your chest, rather than just driving the bar straight up. Think about pushing the floor away from you with your feet to help initiate leg drive and enforce this back-and-up bar path. Don't press the bar too far back; it shouldn't hit the rack or cause you to lose control. Bring it back into balance over the shoulder joint, restoring the starting position. On the way up, you might encounter a sticking point if training at high efforts where the lift feels most difficult. It's likely where you'll fail the lift if going for a max effort set. Research shows it tends to be in the first 20 to 40% of the movement, about 3 to 4 inches off the chest. It'll be individual; typically, the more advanced you are, the lower the sticking point, and the newer you are, the more it'll be in the mid-range. To break through the sticking point, ensure you're pressing the bar up and back, not just straight up. You can try flaring the elbows out a bit more to get your pecs to help the triceps. Think about lifting the bar off your chest with max speed to blast through the point where deceleration would normally happen. The simplest solution is likely you need stronger pecs and triceps.\n\nOnce you're accelerating past the sticking point, you can opt to exhale, but you can hold your breath until you fully lock the lift out. As you near the end range of motion, the bar should complete the arc back toward the starting position over the nipples. Repeat the process, starting with bracing, descending, and pressing again for however many reps your program calls for.\n\nThree common errors I see all the time with the bench press are first, over-tucking or under-tucking the elbows. The cue to tuck your elbows originated in equipped powerlifting, but without a bench shirt, it may not be helpful for you. It's just as common to see people not tucking enough, flaring their elbows out parallel with the bar. This is also not ideal; it puts your shoulder at an increased risk of injury and makes the bar path less efficient since it's forced to go straight up and down. Most won't be as strong benching with flared elbows. A slight tuck is good. As you get to the sticking point, more of a flair might help you finish the lift. If you have difficulty figuring out how you're using your elbows, I'd recommend slow eccentric presses with lighter weights to be mindful of where your elbows are and where they're going. \n\nThe second common error is benching with a completely flat back. You may not need as extreme of an arch as a competitive powerlifter, but maintaining some arch confers at least three major benefits: first, the lumbar and thoracic vertebrae and intervertebral discs are safer in the lordotic or arched position; the more decline pushing angle is safer for the shoulder joint; and you'll likely be stronger in this position, meaning more total load on the active muscle groups.\n\nThe third error is a lack of leg drive. If your feet are positioned wherever, just out in front of you on the bench rather than tucked behind you, you're not maximizing your strength potential. Figuring out how to use your legs in the bench press may take time, but mastering it is important. I've linked a few good articles in the description. \n\nAlongside this video, I'll be releasing my bench press specialization program. Like most of my programs, it's more of a bench press training manual, which covers way more detail than I could touch on here. It includes an eight-week training program for intermediate to advanced level lifters aiming to increase bench press strength. It's more than just a bench program; it's an upper-lower training split five days a week, focusing on developing bench strength as that exercise is hit three times per week using daily undulating periodization. \n\nThe program is $29.99, but with the discount code TECHNIQUETUESDAY, you can save $10, bringing it down to $19.99 for the first week of launch. Learn more on my website at jeffnippard.com or click the first link in the description. I hope you enjoyed the video. I've been excited about this series, and we're finally underway. Please leave a like if you enjoyed the video. Don't forget to subscribe if you're new, and I'll see you all next Tuesday."}